Hello and welcome to the next work.
For example,
in this video again to take a look at how to create this wooden floorboard trader
and I'm going to show you every single step of the
way of how to create this pattern and the whole shader
as you can see the no tree is quite elaborate as with the last work,
for example what you're going to take a step,
but we're going to take each step at a time and go through the whole tree
And as you can see
at the very core of this shader is the note group that is called advanced bricks,
which will also create in this video.
It looks like this and gives the shade of the basic pattern that it uses
and a bunch of useful outputs that are
used by different parts of the remaining shader.
So because this work for example is mainly
leaned onto the chapter of the module setup.
This is what we're mostly going to be focusing on how to set up this
particular pattern and no group
and then going from there how to create the rest of the
shader using the information that we gain from this note group.
So first,
now I want to show you some of the functionality of this note group right away so you
already know what I'm going for which will make
the explanation is a bit easier to follow.
So just like every texture,
this note group takes the vector input and returns a texture
here. Those are a couple of different outputs.
The first one just being a height map depending on the parameters that you plug in.
The second one is a mask for the mortar between the
boards which you can also specify the size of and here
then there is the position of the cells that are creating the boards
they can use as I.
Ds Purcell to create different effects that change from board to board.
Then there is the cell U. V. S which go from 0 to 1 in both the X and the Y axis for each cell
which you can use to map textures on top of each individual board.
Then there's a random RGB output that gives you
a different colour poor board to add some randomization
and then there's also a dimension output which is
simply the inputs for with the height of the
board's packed into a vector which is useful as
well for some effects that we're going to create
now regarding the inputs. There is the with
and height of the boards,
the mortar size,
the corner radius to smooth the corners of the boards.
Then there's a bevel input that is driven with a map right now.
But if I remove that,
you can see how you can simply drive the bevel effect of the board.
The height map.
And there is a repeated offset
which right now is set to two which is
the frequency of how the boards are regularly shifted.
And as you can see in this pattern right now,
every board is shift by half its length for every second row.
And this is pretty much the frequency of how many rolls
it takes until a board is shifted by its full length.
So if I just put this to three
you can see how it staggers up
And putting it to one.
We'll give you know, regular offset at all.
The only thing left here is the random offset
and if I put this to zero you can see that we have only the regular asset working.
And the random offset is on a scale from 0 to 1
between
no offset at all
and
a full random offset which means that some boards can be
displaced by the whole length but that is dependent on the
repeated offset as well as when I set this to to
the maximum random offset these boards can get
is half the length.
So this random ization is less of an effect
to maintain the overall look of these effects.
And yeah,
this is basically what this note group is doing and
what we are going to set up in the video.
The rest of the shader in general. You have already seen in the example scene,
what I added for this video is the no troop which we're going to focus on.
So at this point let's just dive into it.
The first thing again is that I'm just deleting
this material so we start with a blank canvas
and add a new material
but for now again just ignore this principle
be sdf and start creating the base pattern.
What I'm starting with to create a pattern is as always the input coordinates
here, I'm just picking the hue the map
Which just goes from 0 to 1 and X&Y on the plane.
And first I'm going to start and create
this pattern in the very simplest way possible.
So what I want to add up with is a pattern of rectangular cells
where can drive the width and length with parameters.
So I'll already add in the width and length as input parameters here.
Yeah,
I'm going to name these inputs as well. So later I'm going to know how to work with them
and I'm going to put them into a victory
to have easier control over them.
And now
I'm going to work with those UV coordinates by using a vector math known,
I'm going to use the same trick as always
by just
scaling the Huey map and then using the fraction operation.
But here I'm not going to do the scaling with a multiply or scale node
but I'm going to use the divide. Note
the reason for that is that I want to
be able to specify the width and length as dimensions
rather than the frequency of how many plants there are going to be on the plane.
So it's pretty much the in various operation that I have to use here,
which is dividing.
And as you can see when I scaled down with here,
the values of this scale map actually getting higher,
which is exactly what I need because then
the fraction operation will create more cells.
So let's just add in the fraction operation
and now we can see that's already working pretty much as we expected,
can change the width and length
and it reacts accordingly. So if I just had both, the one just to see
It is exactly one cell.
Seeing them both to 0.5.
Mhm.
They are exactly half of this plane long and wide.
So let's now go for something that looks a little bit more like
what we are going for to have more of an idea what's happening
and a little bit more like this aspect ratio.
And yeah, that's the basis of the pattern. Already. Pretty much done.
Now, first I want to talk about the offset, parole now an offset.
As I explained multiple times throughout the course
is achieved by adding or subtracting coordinate factors.
So if I just before I'm dividing here, use another vector math. No, it's set to add.
I can shift these balls around.
The thing here is that I want this shifting value to be dependent on the rolls.
So within one roll of boards
it should all be the same offset
but between different rows,
it should be varying.
So before we split this plane in the individual cells of the boards.
I want to first split them in individual cells for the rose.
And the way I'm doing that is simply using
a separate X. Y. Z. No
because here we only need one dimension which is the X. Dimension.
And then we can just use a math note
set to snap.
And as an instrument used the width of the boards.
And as you can see now we have a different value
for the individual roles.
If I just plug this snapped coordinates into the ad
operation
and you can already see how these roles are being shifted.
Now we only have to control how this shifting works
first I want to implement the regular offset and
for that I'm going to scale up these snapped coordinates
So that we have the index of Israel as a full value. So it counts from 0123
instead of an increments of the width as
it does right now to normalize these numbers,
I'm going to just divide by the with
because before we had zero widths,
one with two widths and so on.
And if I divide by that it's normalized to be 0123.
And now to turn this into a irregular repetition
I'll use another math notes set to Margallo
and Modelo is very similar to the fraction operation
but you can choose the maximum value
So it does not wrap around after one
but after the value that you choose as the second input.
So
instead of one, for example
I can just choose to
And then what is returned will be zero
and 1.
And then this index here is to
so we'll wrap around give me zero again
And then it goes on with 010101.
If I say that this two or 3
It'll give me 01
and then two
And wrap around again at three.
And that can be done for all the other numbers as well.
So I'm going to create another input node.
The only problem right now is that all
the values in between give me some weird artifacts
I wish I don't want.
So I'm going to include another operation set to round.
So all the other numbers in between just get cut off two whole numbers
that just makes it a little bit more user friendly.
Now we only have to use this modular up to control the offset.
So to do that I'll just use a combined X y z note
and plug it into the
why component.
Because that's the direction the boards are going to be shifted in
and then plug that into the ad input.
But here we have to keep in mind what is actually happening with the values
the vector map that we are adding.
These vector on top right now is simply the UV map that has not been altered at all.
And the values that we're adding are all multiples of one.
So it's simply shifting the UV map by one hole size of a plane,
which is not at all what we want.
We want to shift the rose by
halfs or thirds or quarters of the length of the boards.
So there's two things we have to keep in mind
first is the position where the vector is added
right now. As I said, it's just to the UV map,
but it should be after by dividing fully length
to add it in the right unit.
For the simple
vector map,
a unit is the size of the whole plane,
but after dividing a unit is
the size of the length of the boards.
So as you can see if we add one here, nothing changes
If we add .5
is exactly shifted by half a board length.
So this is the place we want to add a shift to.
But there's also another thing we have to keep in mind which is that the values,
as I said here are all increments of one.
And so we have to divide this value as well by the frequency input.
And as you can see now it works nicely
at this point, I want to already start
organizing the notes a little bit better but collapsing them
when all the inputs are already driven with connected sockets
and grouping them together by the functionality.
So I just organized them as a stack of notes
and at a frame to group them together.
Now on top of the irregular offset, we also have the Iran um offset.
And to get that
I also use the snapped coordinates along the X axis
to get a different random value for each role.
And the random value is provided as always with the white noise texture
here we only have one dimension to drive this with the
X coordinates.
So I'm just going to set this to one D. to increase the performance by a little bit
but I still want to be able to change how these random values look like.
So I also add in between an add node
with which I can shift the values around. That gives me a different random behavior.
Now we have random values between zero and one with this white noise texture value
output and we can simply remap the values to do what we want by subtracting 0.5
and adding another multiply node to be able to change the scale
of the effect And for this scaling also create another input parameter.
I just set it to 0.5 and call it a random offset
and then just connected to the multiply node
this value.
Now we can essentially just add on top of the regular
offset that we plugged into the combined X y Z note.
So to make it a little bit more readable,
I just remove this note from the frame and then using
an ad note to just add the value and top,
we don't need any control over these values here.
So I just collapsed them
and group them together as the random offset.
And now we already have a coordinate map with
a random offset and a regular offset with a frequency
that we're going to be able to use for that floorboard shader.
But the note group with the base texture is not only going to include this corner map,
we need other outputs as well.
Most importantly, there should be a height map.
That height map can be created from these coordinates though.
So let's start doing that. Now
these coordinates here give us essentially a Hughley map per board
Which goes from 0 to 1 in both acts and y direction for one cell.
And what I want to create within these cells now
are rectangles with rounded corners and they fall off
That goes from 0 to 1 along an edge
and there is a very nice and simple way to do that.
First. We'll have to mirror these coronets in the center.
So just duplicate this vector math, node
said to subtract
and subtract 0.5 and X and Y direction
here, we are not going to bother about the is that component at all?
As this texture is not going to work in a three dimensional space either way.
That's just in the nature of how these floorboards work.
There's no way around that really. You have to use some way of mapping the three D.
Space into a two D. Space and you re coordinates are the easiest way to do so.
But I'm going on a tangent here.
So let's go back to the share then to mirror the coordinates.
I use another vector math notes sent to absolute.
And also I'm going to scale these vectors up by a factor of two
To make sure that again the values go from 0 to 1 in both directions.
And now we have to keep in mind where the cells on this map actually are
these darkest spots
where both X and Y component of the vector that we're seeing are approaching zero
are
exactly the center of the cells.
As you can see when you, when I just flip between the two views
but to create the height map,
we want the exact opposite.
They're going to be zero at the edge and then approach one for the century.
So I'm just going to use another subtract note,
butt plug this map into the second input
and set the first input as
one
for X and Y component and zero for zero
to invert
the map we had
and now we can start creating the planks from this pattern.
I'm just going to start doing that by using a separate X Y, Z note
and using the Excellent why component to create
the shapes.
I do that by creating another math node and setting it to a minimum.
And as you can see this already kind of resembles what we are going for
But there are a few problems with this
as you can see it is simply stretched
along the Y axis
Going from 0-1 and 20 again on both axes.
Without recognizing that the with is much shorter than the length of the boards.
So to counter this effect,
you can simply use yet another vector math known
and setting it to multiply
while multiplying with the dimension vector that we created way in the beginning.
So let's just grab the output of this and plug it into the multiply node.
And as you can see now it works much nicer.
The reason for that is instead of going from 0
to 1 independent on the actual scale on the plane.
Now the values
that this is giving us are dependent on the actual dimension.
So the difference in length and with is actually respected here.
That is a very important concept to understand
which we are going to use multiple times.
Now there are a couple of additional things that we
can do to control how this is going to look
1st. I want to be able to control the fall off.
Well that I add another math node
at the end here is set to divide
And now I can specify the length of this gradient until the approaches one.
Just try something very small like 0.02
And then clamp this value so it stops when it approaches one
and as you can see
I have control over how this fall of works.
Then also in the beginning I showed you
that I want these planks to have around corners
and there is a very easy way to achieve this.
We can't just instead of the minimum operation,
use the smooth minimum operation.
Now we have very nice control
over how they are smoothed at this corner where they are mixed together
and this is already looking very close to what we are going for.
There's one more thing as a functionality that
I want to add to creating the height map
which is adding a visible mortar right now it is just
infinitely thin on the edges.
So what I do to achieve this is at another
vector math noting here,
which if you remember is the vector map that we are using to create the pattern
and then simply subtracting from that,
essentially shifting it
now hear this might not look like much,
but if we take a look at the resulting height map,
you can see that this very nicely adds a thickness to the mortar.
Now to keep track of what we are controlling in this height map,
I'm going to add three more input values
and
one is the mortar,
I just said it to zero for now,
one for the round corners
and one for the gradient which is the bevel
and now we actually have most of the functionality of our note group put together.
I'll just do some more adjustments to make it more readable
to already get a mask of where the mortar is going
to be which is one of the outputs I want.
I'll just take the output from the smooth minimum
Where the values are not yet scaled and clamped between zero and 1
And check for any values that are less than zero.
And as you can see if I increase the mortar scale
I get a nice mask
So let's see what other outputs we want from this nursery
there is
instead of the cell U V. S
also the sell position
and we can get that by simply instead of using the fraction
operation using a snap operation set to an instrument of one.
But you have to be a little bit careful here because this is not the accurate position
as these roles are offset
and as you can see when we're offsetting
the actual values that this map here has are not changing Purcell
which they should if these values would reflect the actual position.
So after we add this victory on the coordinates we have to subtract it back
just using the same vector
and you can see that it reflects the position
much more accurately as I change this shift value.
But on top of this
remember in the beginning we also divided by the dimension vector
to normalize this vector map
for the size of the board.
So after we divided in the first place
we have to multiply it back on top
in the end
just change this to multiply
and there you go. Now it is much more accurate to the actual UV map
and it is
also dependent on the parameters
so this we can use as the actual output for the position.
Then also I want a random color
which I'm just going to use another white noise texture for.
But here I am not simply going to use the position
because then
the values change depending on the shift
I wanted to be more reproducible
and so instead of the adapted position vector,
I'm just going to use the snap values.
Then it's going to be consistent with different shifts
and yeah that is actually all the functionality that we need for the note group done.
So before we move on to anything else
I want to
put this note tree, what we have right now into a functioning note group.
So that's beyond what we have
identified all the inputs and outputs
here we have the
input vector map which is going to be one input.
So I'm just going to string it together like this,
then the width and length which will also have just one input each,
the frequency for the irregular offset,
then the Iran um offset
and later on here the different parameters to control the height map.
I'm just going to drag these all the way over here and put them up like this.
Everything else that we have in the notary
is not crucial to be controlled from the outside.
So this is a nice way to have all the
functionality of this tree listed up as the input parameters.
And now for the outputs,
I also want to do something similar by using reroute
nodes in the way I already did for this output here
by just selecting the op ed that I want to have with the urinal
and then dragging the shift and right mouse button
to create a reroute note and lining them up just as the inputs.
It's good to be the mortar mask,
the height mask and then a little bit further back sell
you vis And also I want the dimension as an output.
We can organize and name these later on.
So now without further ado let's just
grab all the notes that are going to be part of the tree
which excludes the inputs and outputs.
And press control G.
And now there's no group already has all it needs
but we need to clean something up to make it more
intuitive and actually workable because right now all these values,
victories and colours
don't give any insight our hint as how they work. So take a take a look back
and see which input is which
so to organize the inputs and outputs in the note group itself.
Just pressing end to open the properties and go into the note properties
to change the inputs around,
let's just simply organize these in the same order
as they are outside of the group node.
There we go. Now we have a better overview of how it works
and for the outputs we don't even actually have to do that because we
can just connect the view and old and immediately see what map this is.
So for now I'll just quickly go over everything and just rename it accordingly.
Okay, now everything is renamed, I did run into one issue though,
which is that the mortar input,
which is supposed to be a value is shown as a vector input.
The reason for that is that on the inside
this is connected to a vector input.
And so the note group thinks that is supposed to be a vector as well.
To change that, we have to simply add a new socket by connecting it to any value input
and then replacing it with the mortar connection.
Yeah.
And
as you can see now it is fixed
and it still works the same way,
let's just give this note group name as well.
Mhm
mm hmm.
And now we can actually go ahead and disconnect all of these sockets.
The problem is that now
all of the values are set to the values that they were connected to on the inside,
not to the values of these notes here.
So we just have to quickly go over that.
And one thing we cannot disconnect is the um app because it is still going to be needed
but now everything is working the same way so I can just delete all these nodes.
But another thing that we should change is the properties of these inputs.
Because as I showed you in the video about note groups,
you can specify the default values and the maximum
and minimum values of all of your inputs.
Also we can hide the input of the vector map
when nothing is connected.
So it is already implied that a map would be needed.
We can do that by simply hiding
the value
in the interface.
So now let's just go over the default values and the maximum and minimum limits
for the default values.
I'm just going to choose the exact values that we have right now.
Now that the defaults are set
to take a look at the limits
for the width and length, a negative scale does not make any sense.
I'm just going to set the minimum values for both at zero.
Mhm.
But for the maximum of the input,
I don't want to impose any restrictions at all
For the frequency, if you remember a frequency of one
was already the minimum you could get
anything lower. Doesn't make any sense.
So here I want to set the minimum S one
the random offset is bound to the scale
of the boards.
So here I want to actually limit it between zero and 1
to have basically a percentage of randomness.
And at this point to make clear for the user that this is a percentage.
I'm actually also going to use another
type of interface here.
I've also showed this in the video about not groups but for values,
there is also an additional way
of displaying the input.
For example, in the mix, Arduino,
you have this factor input which has a blue
bar that fills up as your value approaches one.
This very clearly shows you that one is the maximum
and you can essentially see the percentage of this value right in the interface.
So to get this interface, I'm going to create a new input
And replace that one with the random offset.
And as you can see
in the interface now we have this nice interaction.
This also works by the way if you just change the limits to anything you want
and for the remaining three inputs,
The only thing I want to change as well here is setting the minimum 20.
And that is the note group. Almost done.
The last thing I want to do is just order these inputs
and outputs in a way that makes a little bit more sense
by sorting them a little bit by importance
and grouping them by their functionality
and that is the whole workflow for the heart of the shader.
Done and gives us this nice no group
with the height map and all the other outputs we need for the shader.
This note group now gives us all the information that
we need to create the rest of the shader.
So let's go ahead with that
first.
I want to start by using the height map
to create a displacement on the shader for that.
The work we have to make sure that the shader
has enough geometry in the mesh to work with.
Therefore the plane geometry is already subdivided a bunch of times.
And on top of that I'm using a subdivision modifier.
You can set a different level for the view port in the
rendering to control how much geometry has generated for the final render.
Mhm.
Alternatively,
you can also turn on the experimental feature set in the render settings
and then use the adaptive subdivision
that will take into account how far away the cameras from the object
and then Tessalit the geometry so that one pixel has approximately one polygon.
We can change the dicing scale for that here.
But for a better preview, I like to have a constant subdivision
that is not dependent on the camera.
So I just keep it like this.
Then to be able to use displacement with the shader.
We have to go into the material properties,
scroll down to the displacement settings
And change the displacement. Type two.
Either displacement only or displacement. And bump
here. I am not planning to use a bump map on top, but only the height map.
So I'm just going to choose this placement and bumped
to drive both at the same time with one map.
And now that the shader is ready for displacement,
we can simply create a displacement known in the notary
and use the height map is the input.
And then we can simply select the displacement factory to the displacement output.
And now you can see that even even now because we
selected displacement and bump for the control of the height map,
we have a nice normal map depending on the height map.
And if we go into cycles around the view,
you can see the displacement is already working.
The problem right now is though
that this is obviously way too strong.
one thing you have to keep in mind though
is that the strength and height of these is independent from
the scale for the width and length that you select here.
So if you might have a largest scale for these parameters,
this height might not be as much.
So you have to control both individually.
But for now I want to change the scale to a way lower number about 0.05.
And also I want to adjust the mid level parameter.
This is the value of the height map that would result in
no displacement at all and thus stay at the same level.
Every value above that will displace the geometry along the
normal axis in the positive direction and every value below that
Will displace it into a negative direction.
So as the middle level right now is 0.5.
We have a displacement in both directions from the initial level of the plane.
What I want here is just have a displacement in the positive direction
and have the level of the gaps between the boards,
stay at the same position.
So what I'm going to choose for the mid level is zero
and now everything is just displaced
up.
Also, I want to be able to control the profile of this edge
right now it is just straight linear because that is what the height map returns
and therefore I can just use an RGB
curves node to exactly control how this profile looks
next.
I want to create some more interest to this
height map by adding variations between the different boards.
There are two things I want to do for this height map.
I want to tilt these boards randomly
and also I want to create a band that goes from the inside out.
So let's start with the tilt.
I'm going back to the V. View to have a better faster preview
and then I'm going to create a tilt map.
What I want to achieve this
is have a simple gradient that is linear
along
each individual board
in a random direction
and to get that I can simply take the sell you the output that we have
and then adjust that to be used as the tilt map,
I'm going to add a vector math node and subtract 0.5
in both. Accent why to have it centered.
And then I'm gonna add a
back to rotate. Known,
rotating around these axes.
And as you can see we have a nice rotation here.
The problem with this is that the rotation is
schooled because the vectors are stretched along the boards
so to have an accurate representation of this rotation,
we should first take the dimension of these boards into account.
You can simply do that by using the dimension vector
and multiplying it on top.
And if we rotated after
you can see that the rotation looks much more accurate. Now.
Now we simply have to randomize this angle input to
have a random rotation for each cell for that.
We can simply grab one of the random values that we have.
I just use a separate RgB no to separate the random color that we get
and we can just plug this into the angle of the vector of take note.
Now the randomness of this value for the angle is between zero and 1.
But we want to be able to have Iran and rotation between 0 and 360.
Despite the values
that you can type in here being in degrees. When you plug something in
the value that is taken is used in radiance,
which is another form of describing angles.
If you're not quite sure how to convert them,
you can just use a math node
And convert to Arabians or 2
But I can just tell you that
360 translate into
two pi.
So what I'm going to do is multiply the Iran of value
with the maximum angle that I want which is two pi.
I can just type that in two times pi
Which is about 6.3
and now we have total randomness from no rotation at
all to a full rotation and everything in between.
So the last thing we have to do to get our tilt
map is just separate this vector map into a single gradient.
This can be either X or Y.
That doesn't really matter because they're just rotated by 90.
And now we only have to combine this tilt map with our height map.
The operation I want to use here is multiply
because I don't want the edges between the boards
to be offset by using an ad operation.
I want them all to be exactly still at zero.
After adding the tilt map and if I just use the multiple aberration,
that is exactly what happens.
The only problem is that a lot of these values are in the negative range
and if I multiply with negative values.
My height map will also go into the negative range
and then this is what you get.
The edges between the boards are still at zero.
But some of the boards themselves are below that
which is not what we want.
So let's add some operations to change how to apply this tilt map first.
I'm going to add another multiply node because they want to be able to
control the strength and at this stage here they are still centered around zero.
So I can nicely scale them around zero.
And then afterwards I want to add one
Because then these values are centered around one and 1
when multiplied to another value does not change that value. So we'll have some.
So this multiplication here will scale some places of the map up and some down
but never below zero.
So if I just plug this into the displacement map
and go into cycles around the view,
you can see how it can control the displacement and the scale of this tilt.
With this multiply factor,
I'll just add an input notes. So later on we still know that this is the value.
We want to change.
And now we already have some nice variation in
the map that we can control with the parameter.
The other variation that I told you I wanted to do
is having a bend in the boards.
So let's go back into the material preview and create a band map
for this just as well. I use the cell U. V. S
and start by centering them with a subtraction
mm.
Now I want to have a radial gradient from the center outwards to create the band map.
You could also just use the white corner of this vector map to get a straight gradient
but I want it a little bit more around here
and to get a radial gradient that shows me
the distance of the vector map to the center.
I could just use the length operation
to get the length of those factories.
Now this is very much stretched along the y axis.
So let's add in uh multiply node in between.
So we were able to control
how the Y and X. X. Is are stretched.
Then I want to be able to control the profile of this band.
So I just add another RGB curves. Note
I wanted to be a little bit smoother
on both sides
so I create the gradient like this
and then we have our band map and then we already have our band map finished
this, we can now add in the exact same way as we did with the tilt map
and just duplicate the notes out for this
and reconnect the notes
and then connected to the band map.
Let's take a look how this
is turning out
and there we go.
Get a very very strong bend going on right now
it looks like they are not smooth on the outside
which is probably because the values of this length output
Are only going into a length of approximately 0.5 instead of one.
So to change this and have better control with the RGB curves. Note
just adjust the multiply values here
And just multiply both with two
to get into the higher values
and now we have much better control with the RgB curves. Note
but of course this is way too strong
so that's just two and down this factor
I want a more subtle bend.
Now these effects are still quite strong but I just want to
show how they work and we can still adjust the values later on
and now we have some nice variation in the general height map of this shader.
Another thing I want to do here to create some more interest to these edges
is create some variation in how strong this bevel is
because all of these values here are dry viable with inputs.
You can just as well use a noise texture
and drive these values with an actual noise.
So that's simply do this by adding nice texture
using the same UV coordinates
and mapping
the noise to another range
that reflects how we want the battle to look
Right now the Bevel is 0.02 and because this input is
going to be overwritten with the map that we are using.
I'm going to create a new parameter input.
This, I'm just going to put two
.02 for now.
There are different ways to map this bevel value
to a new range with the map range known.
But here I want to very simply use a math nerd
set to multiply to practically create a new maximum of this value.
And as you can see
that way we can create some nice variation
and now we can still control
how big this bevel effect is with this parameter.
Next let's get into actually adding some color to this shader.
I want to create the wooden texture in a very similar way that I did for the world work.
For example,
the only difference here is that this shader is
only operating with a two dimensional vector space.
So instead of creating the rings as cylinders,
I'm just going to create a simple repeating pattern
here.
I want the pattern of the wood to be
actually independent of the individual scale of the board.
So instead of using any of the outputs of the board texture,
I'm using the actual UV map.
I'm just going to use a separate X Y Z note
and grab the record is to look at the X. Component.
Now I'm just going to use the same old trick that we used a bunch of
times in this course already by just multiplying
with a number that gives me a frequency
And then using the ping pong operation
set to a scale of one
and now this value here is a nice indicator for
the number of brings that we're going to get.
I'm just going to add a value input node
and connected to that.
No I'm going to set this to like
and now the crucial part I want to add some distortion to this
to have something that looks like wood.
So what I'm doing is distorting these vector inputs with a noise texture
and for now I'm not going to use the same UV map
and then distort the coordinates that the pattern is using
using a mix. RgB notes set to linear light.
This effect is the way too strong right now. So let's go for something like 0.05
and then slightly adjust there's noise tax too.
But another thing I want to do here is
changing the aspect ratio of this noise texture.
You will see what effect that creates.
Just use another vector math. Known
set to multiply
and then squash it on the X axis is
by increasing the X value here.
And this looks a lot more like what we are going for.
The only problem with this now is
that it's a complete pattern that goes over the whole surface
which is not realistic when you have individual floorboards.
They should not be connected to their pattern.
So what we have to do is
the couple the victories of the individual cells
and there is a very simple way to do this.
We can just on top of this
coordinate that we are using for the distortion,
add a random RGB
for each cell.
And as you can see
as this shifts the factory map for each individual cell.
We get a different distortion
depending on the cell
and that is exactly what we want.
And this then is going to be the base pattern of the wood texture
and that is the base pattern for the wooden texture. Almost done.
What I want to do now is the same thing as I did for the woodwork for example.
I'm going to add some variation in this pattern by using a map range note
instead of adding another noise texture for this,
I can just grab the one I already have
and just use a separate RGB node
to use another channel than the one that is used for the distortion which is just the
red channel.
Because the only information that we take from this distorted coordinate map
is the X. Value.
That means that the distortion in the Y and Z
components don't even play a role for this pattern,
which means the green and blue slot of this noise texture
are not used for the distortion.
And that is why I want to use one of these for the remaining part
because then it is disconnected.
So let's choose the green channel
and plug it into the two men and put
that means that all the points that are previously on zero. I don't know
exactly mapped to this noise which is between zero and one centered around 0.5.
That means that all the values that were previously one are still one
as this to max value. Is
that one?
That is quite convenient because now
we can include this as well into the high texture
and we always know
that the maximum of these lines are always at exactly one.
So if you just create an RGB curves note
and make it nice and smooth at the top here.
That means that it is going to be smooth and
the height map as well because we always know that the
maximum is mapped to this range and this is the last
adjustment that I want to make to the height map.
And I'm going to do it right after I control the profile of the height map
using another multiply note
and as you can see it just creates a nice and subtle variation.
If you just take a look at that in the principal BSD F.
With the normals, you can see that works nicely.
It is still quite strong as is the displacement. So I'm probably just going to
Lower this value here,
Let's say .02.
And this looks a lot better.
But now we have created the base texture for the
wood that we're also going to use for the color.
Before we move on, I'm just going to group and name these.
So now that is organized again, let's go ahead and create the actual column map.
I'm just going to grab this output from this
base pattern
and create a color ramp
and I'm simply going to choose some colors that are fitting.
But instead of having just this very uniform color,
I want to have some variation in the color as well.
So what I'm going to do for that
is just duplicate the color ramp
and create some different color variation.
So now we have two different color maps using the same base texture
and what I want to do now for the variation
is simply taking
a mixer to be known
to mix between them
and as a factor I'm going to use another random value per cell
for that. I'm just going to use
another separate RgB known,
grab the Iran and color.
I'm just going to take the right channel
to mix between the different colors Purcell
and then we already have some variation.
For now I want to do more of the color composition that I have planned
for example.
I want to also reflect the gradient that we used
for the bending of the boards and the color.
So we just have to take the band map.
I'm going to add a new color ramp and then use this band map to connect it to it
and this gradient and then combining with another mix RGB node set to overlay
and as you can see this, add some more interest to the column map
right now. The effect is too strong though.
Mhm
maybe more subtle like this.
Another thing I want to do for the color is simply taking another overlay operation
and using another random value per cell
very nicely creates more variation.
But here it is very important that you don't take the
same random value as you took for combining the different color maps
because that in this case would mean every board that is closer to this color
also gets overlay with a darker value and every cell that is closer to this
gets a brighter value instead
and that means that there's variation works along the same axis
to use a different random value instead
that creates a different type of variation and is much more interesting.
Another thing I want to do here is faking some ambient occlusion
by making the color actually darker at the bottom of these values here.
For that we can simply add
a multiply node
and multiply
the plank profile that we have
that generate some more interest the shader
without using actual displacement in the preview.
Looking at this now, with the color composition complete.
I'm going to adjust the color ramps a little bit to get some nice colors in here
at this point we are very far into the creation of the shader
but there are a couple of more things that I want to do
1st. We should create some variation in the roughness
as this is a stylized version of a shader.
This is not a super crucial step, but it's still something that I can recommend.
Let's take a map range note
and use this base pattern of the wood
as a basis
and then adjust the mapping to some values that make sense in our case
here, on the lower values to have a higher roughness
and the higher values to be a little bit smoother.
And this is about what I'm going for us. So let's just plug this in
to better see what the roughness is doing is
a good idea to disconnect the base color first
and go for a very dark color
because then all you see is pretty much the reflection.
And now that the basis looks about right.
I want to add some variation here as well
by also using
an overlay operation
and taking the third round of value that we get from the round of color output.
This should be a very subtle variation though,
as you can see right now is way too strong
but it also adds some more interest to the shader.
So now let's just plug the color back in
and what we have here is the very basis of the would completely finished.
But there are two more things. I want to add
the first thing,
I want to add some more detail to the wood
itself by adding four bolts to the boards in the corners
for that. Again I take the cell, U. V. S.
And just as the other times i subtract 0.5 in both accent why?
To center the Coordinate Map.
And I'm also going to scale the vector map by two
To make sure that it goes from 0 to 1 from the inside out.
Then I also want to take into account the dimension of this vector map.
So I'm going to multiply it with the dimension vector
that takes into account the width and length of the boards.
So now the corners are not stretched.
I want to create the bolts in
each one of these corners
and
every corner is going to be the exact same.
So at this point
I can actually use another vector math set to absolute
because this is going to mirror both the X and y coordinate.
And now each one of these four quarters of each board
has the same coordinate map.
So whatever we do with this map now
it's going to be mirrored
at the next step. I want to specify where the center of the bolts is going to be
for that. I just use a subtract note
and as you can see the shift
the center of the coordinates in each individual quarter outwards.
This gets a little bit more clear when I add another vector math notes, set to length
and now we can see that these dark spots are the
center of the coordinate maps in each one of the quarters
and here we can nicely adjust
where the center is going to sit.
Now this is pretty much exactly already what we want,
having these bolts in each one of these corners.
But now if we adjust the parameters of the no group,
these bolts are still going to stay in place
and not adjust with it.
So I want to do something else.
Instead of choosing where these bolts are going to sit manually,
I'm going to take into account the dimension vector. Again,
I'm just going to add a rewrite known
and then simply
for now subtract that vector instead.
And now
the centers are sitting exactly in the corner of the boards
as you can see here
and they're still adjusts with the parameters that we choose.
So now the only thing left to do
is subtract from this shifting vector
and specify exactly where we want the corners to sit.
And now we have pretty much the same pattern that we have before.
But it adjusts nicely
with the settings of the note group.
So now the only thing left to do is to turn this into actual bolts
for that, I'm just going to add a math known onto this length
and divide
by an input value that I can choose.
And if I now
add another Math notes said to less than
And just choose the threshold is one. For example,
you can see that with this parameter, I can choose the radius of these bolts
and with the less than note, I get a nice mask.
So now we have to mix these bolts into the rest of the shader.
This is the simple mask that we have. So let's first quickly makes it into the color.
Just using this mask
and the mixed operation
and we can do the same thing for the roughness as well.
Mhm.
Also we can simply use this mask and plug it into the metallic input.
The last thing that we have to take care of, which is why it's looking quite off.
Here is the height map.
We can simply modify the base height map
with a math No. To
let's just take a maximum operation
and simply choose the mask
So that the bolts are actually mapped to exactly one
and all the wooden texture that scaled it down before is ignored in those places.
This is already looking much better.
The only thing I want to do is create a little bit of an edge around them
for that we can simply before the maximum operation,
choose a minimum operation to actually lower the values
and use this radio gradient.
I just choose the radio. Great in itself. This will not do anything.
And if I now deactivate the maximum operation for the bolts themselves,
you can see that I have this nice inset where the bolts are.
But the problem is it is exactly the size of the bulls themselves.
So that's brought in this area
by just
by just subtracting a value from this gradient
and as you can see
it gets wider,
I'd simply reactivate the maximum operation to get the bolts back
and there we go. Now we have a nice
edge around these bolts.
You can still tweak the positioning of the bolts
and their size.
But yeah, this is the main shader done.
There is one very last thing that I want to do though,
which is
adding some dust on the edges
for that. I'm just going to add a diffuse shader
and mix it into it.
I'm just taking
a grungy color.
We can
simply blend into it.
Now we have to create the mask for this.
I'm just going to grab the UV coordinates again,
Centre them by subtracting 0.5 in both X&Y direction.
Scale them up so they are from zero to run from the center outwards.
Then I'm going to add an absolute operation
to mirror the whole thing
and separate the individual components with a separate X Y Z. Noted.
This is very much the same technique that we use to create
the height map within the note group for the wooden boards.
So what I'm going to adhere as a smooth maximum operation
and this way you can create a nice smooth gradient like this
and now we can use a map range node to map this to be the mosque
for this mix trader.
This effect is quite subtle what it adds to the shader.
I only want to create some more variation because right now it's very uniform.
So before using the map range note
I'm also going to add a noise texture.
I'm simply going to use the mixer to be known with the linear light operation
and with this now we can create some nice variation in the mosque.
She also makes it more interesting
and there we go. That is the whole chitter done from start to finish.
Let's see how this looks in the rendered view.
And the nice thing about the way that we set this
up obviously is that everything is still adjustable with the parameters
and you can use this note group to create all sorts of
other shakers
that are also relying on something similar to this brick structure.
We'll show you how to create this shooter.
I have not taken the time to make small
adjustments and tweaks to make it look more appealing.
So I will just do that now.
Sure
and there we go.
I scale up the dimensions of the boards,
made the wood pattern a little bit less striking and little bit
smoother on the height map and also made the dust brighter.
Finally giving the surrender. Now this is what we get.
Yeah.
And now it looks a lot more like the reference of the example share
but there's one more thing that I have a different in the example scene
and I've also an example for a more advanced version
of the shader with fixed endings in the scene.
And as you can see,
this version also closes up these boards nicely where they
are cut off on the side of the plane.
One thing though that I have not talked about our
techniques to make the boards and exactly on the edge,
that would cry some more advanced manipulation of vectors and would only
have complicated everything more so we did not want to include here,
but there are different techniques to do so.
And one is in this example scene
using a modified version of the note group that we create is here
that has fixed endings.
As you can see all the boards nicely and on the edge of the plane.
But this is using some tricks and only works with some restrictions,
but it actually works quite nicely.
The reason why I didn't want to add it
to this video here is because it's quite elaborate.
If I take a look into the note group,
you can see that it's way more complicated than what we did.
If you feel confident enough to take a look at it, feel free to do.
So it's in the file that I'm uploading to this video.
And just to give you an idea of how it works.
The principle
is that I include more information about the dimension of these boards
in the vector map that I used to create the height map
and actually individual, take a look at how these boys are shortened on both ends
Of the UV Map, from 0 to 1.